Jake Tapper: (00:00)
Welcome to this unique event, the CNN Univision Democratic Presidential Debate with the two leading candidates for the Democratic nomination, former Vice President Joe Biden and Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders, candidates. Welcome. It’s good to have you. I’m Jake Tapper, along with CNN’s Dana Bash, and Univision’s Ilia Calderón.

Dana Bash: (00:19)
We come together tonight at an extraordinary time in our country when people are worried about far more than just presidential politics. We’re in a national emergency because of the devastating global pandemic of coronavirus. It has killed nearly 6,000 [inaudible 00:00:34] and more than 3,300 known cases here in the United States. As a result, tonight’s debate will focus heavily on the crisis.

Ilia Calderón: (00:42)
The setting of this debate is also different. To reduce unnecessary risk of transmission of the virus, CNN, Univision, the Democratic National Committee, and the campaigns moved this debate from Phoenix, Arizona to here at CNN studios in Washington without any audience.

Jake Tapper: (01:00)
All of this comes of course as four more states, Florida, Arizona, Ohio, and Illinois prepare to vote on Tuesday, with Vice President Biden currently leading Senator Sanders in the race for delegates. Here’s what we’re going to do tonight. Each of you will have 90 seconds to answer questions, and 45 seconds for responses and rebuttals. As much as we can, we hope this will be a conversation between the two of you, so let’s begin with the most important issue right now, the coronavirus, and what you would do as president in the face of it. Vice President Biden, let me start with you. We’re in a reality right now that might’ve seemed unimaginable a week ago. Schools have been canceled for more than 25 million students. Grocery store shelves have been cleared out. March Madness, NBA games, Disney parks, Broadway, small businesses, all shut down, and just today the CDC issued a new recommendation that for the next eight weeks, events that consist of 50 people or more throughout the US be canceled or postponed. What do you say to the American people who are confronting this new reality?

Joe Biden: (02:01)
First of all, my heart goes out to those who have already lost someone, or those who are suffering from the virus, and this is bigger than any one of us. This calls for a national rallying to everybody move together, and I laid out in detail what I would do were I president today. You can go to joebiden.com. I laid it out in significant detail, but there are three pieces of this. First of all, have to take care of those who in fact are exposed, or are likely to be exposed to the virus, and that means we have to do testing. We have to get the testing kits up and ready.

Joe Biden: (02:37)
I would have the World Health Organization, I’d take advantage of the test kits they have available to us, even though the president says a million or more are coming, let’s just get all the tests we can done as quickly as we can. Secondly, I would make sure that every state in the union had at least 10 places where they had drive-through testing arrangements. I would also at this point deal with the need to begin to plan for the need for additional hospital beds. We have that capacity in the Department of Defense as well as with the FEMA, and they can set up hundred-bed, 500-bed hospitals and tents quickly.

Joe Biden: (03:12)
We have to lay all that out, but we have to deal with the economic fallout quickly, and that means making sure that people who in fact lose their job, don’t get a paycheck, can’t pay their mortgage, are able to pay it, and pay them now, and do it now. Small businesses be able to borrow interest-free loans. I see my time is up here. You’re going to hold us tightly, I assume, but that’s what I would do. Go to joebiden.com. It lays out precisely what I would do were I president today.

Jake Tapper: (03:37)
Senator Sanders, this morning, Dr. Anthony Fauci acknowledged that it’s possible that hundreds of thousands, if not millions of Americans, could die of coronavirus in a worst-case scenario. If you were president right now, what’s the most important thing you would do tonight to try to save American lives?

Bernie Sanders: (03:56)
Well, first thing we have got to do, whether or not I’m president, is to shut this president up right now, because he is undermining the doctors and the scientists who are trying to help the American people. It is unacceptable for him to be blabbering with unfactual information which is confusing the general public. Second of all, what we need to do, and I’m glad that he has called a state of national emergency. What we have got to do is move aggressively to make sure that every person in this country finally understands that when they get sick with the coronavirus that all payments will be made, that they don’t have to worry about coming up with money for testing. They don’t have to worry about coming up with money for treatment.

Bernie Sanders: (04:42)
This is an unprecedented moment in American history. Now, I obviously believe in Medicare for all. I will fight for that as president, but right now in this emergency, I want every person in this country to understand that when you get sick, you go to the doctor. When you get sick, if you have the virus, that will be paid for. Do not worry about the cost right now, because we’re in the middle of a national emergency.

Bernie Sanders: (05:05)
Second of all, we have to make sure that our hospitals have the ventilators that they need, have the IC units that they need. Right now, we have a lack of medical personnel, and I worry very much that if there is a peak, whether we have the capability of dealing with the hundreds of thousands of people who may be in hospitals, so we need unprecedented action right now to deal with the unprecedented crisis. Bottom line from an economic point of view, what we have got to say to the American people, if you lose your job, you will be made whole. You’re not going to lose income. If Trump can put, or the fed can put a trillion and a half into the banking system …

Jake Tapper: (05:43)
Thank you, Senator.

Bernie Sanders: (05:44)
… we can protect the wages of every worker in America.

Jake Tapper: (05:46)
Thank you, Senator. Vice President Biden, President Trump says he does not take any responsibility for the problems with coronavirus testing, in part because he says he inherited so many rules, regulations, and red tape. Did bureaucratic red tape hamper this response in any way?

Joe Biden: (06:05)
No. Look, the World Health Organization offered, offered the testing kits that they have available and to give it to us now. We refused them. We did not want to buy them. We did not want to get them from them. We wanted to make sure we had our own. I think he said something like, “We have the best scientists in America,” or something to that effect. The idea that we are not prepared for this and not … The other thing I want to point out, and I agree with Bernie, we’re in a situation where we have to now be providing for the hospitals that are going to be needed, needed now.

Joe Biden: (06:37)
The present system cannot handle the surge that is likely to come, so we should already be sitting down and planning where we’re going to put these temporary hospitals, and we can do that. We did that … We’ve been through this before with the coronavirus. We’ve been through this … I mean, excuse me, we’ve been through this before with dealing with the viruses that the N1H1 as well as what happened in Africa. We provided these hospitals dealing with these great pandemics, and were able to do it quickly, and people would have a place to go, but we also have to provide the equipment to protect the first responders, and that’s not being done either.

Jake Tapper: (07:14)
Senator Sanders, on that note, and both of you have addressed this, but obviously another major health concern right now for officials is the potential surge in patients all at once, overburdening hospitals, the healthcare system. You’ve mentioned ICU beds, both of you, and ventilators. We’re already in the middle of flu season, so already a lot of those beds and ventilators are already being used. If you were president right now, what would you do to make sure every sick American is able to get treatment so the US does not suffer the same fate as Italy, where doctors have to decide right now who gets lifesaving treatment and who does not?

Bernie Sanders: (07:51)
Jake, let’s be honest and understand that this coronavirus pandemic exposes the incredible weakness and dysfunctionality of our current healthcare system. Now, we’re spending twice as much per person on healthcare as the people of any other country. How in God’s name does it happen that we end up with 87 million people who are uninsured or underinsured and there are people who are watching this program tonight, and say, “I’m not feeling well. Should I go to the doctor? But I can’t afford to go to the doctor. What happens if I am sick? It’s going to cost thousands of dollars for treatment. Who’s going to feed my kids?” We are the only major country on earth not to guarantee healthcare to all people.

Bernie Sanders: (08:32)
We’re spending so much money, and yet we are not even prepared for this pandemic. How come we don’t have enough doctors? How come hospitals in rural areas are shutting down? How come people can’t afford to get the prescription drugs they need, because we have a bunch of crooks who are running the pharmaceutical industry, ripping us off every single day, and I’ll tell you something right now, in the midst of this epidemic, you’ve got people in the pharmaceutical industry who are saying, “Oh wow, what an opportunity to make a fortune.” So the word has got to go out. I certainly would do this as president. You don’t worry, people of America, do not worry about the cost of prescription drugs. Do not worry about the cost of the healthcare that you’re going to get, because we are a nation, a civilized democratic society. Everybody, rich and poor, middle-class, will get the care they need. The drug companies will not rip us off.

Dana Bash: (09:21)
Thank you, Senator. Vice President Biden, some medical experts are saying the only true way to control this virus is through a national quarantine, requiring every American other than essential personnel to stay home. Would you take that unprecedented step of a national lockdown?

Joe Biden: (09:38)
What I would do is what we did in our administration. I would call a meeting in The Situation Room of all the experts in America dealing with this crisis. I would sit them down, and I would do exactly what we did then. What is it that we need? Listen to the experts. What do we need? With all due respect to Medicare for all, you have a single-payer system in Italy. It doesn’t work there. It has nothing to do with Medicare for all. That would not solve the problem at all. We can take care of that right now by making sure that no one has to pay for treatment, period, because of the crisis. No one has to pay for whatever drugs are needed, period, because of the crisis. No one has to pay for hospitalization because of the crisis, period. That is a national emergency, and that’s how it’s handled.

Joe Biden: (10:23)
It is not working in Italy right now, and they have a single-payer system. Now, with regard to what else I would do, the fact is that we’re in a position where I would bring together the leading experts in the world, instead of doing this, in the United States, instead of doing this piecemeal, sit down and do what we did before with the Ebola crisis. What is needed? And have one voice, one voice, like we did every day we met on that crisis in The Situation Room, so we lay out overall, for all the nation, what the best proposal is and how to move forward. In the absence of that, governors are making some sound decisions. They’re doing the best they can by going out and getting the healthcare experts in their communities and their states to move, but it should be directed from the White House, from The Situation Room, laying out in detail like we did in the Ebola crisis …

Dana Bash: (11:15)
Thank you.

Joe Biden: (11:15)
… and we beat it.

Dana Bash: (11:16)
Thank you. Senator Sanders, your response?

Bernie Sanders: (11:18)
Well, first of all, the dysfunctionality of the current healthcare system is obviously apparent. As I said earlier, there are people who hesitate go to the doctor. You’re going to have the maze of regulations. Well, if this is my income, but that’s my income, can I get it? Can I not get it? Clearly we are not prepared, and Trump only exacerbates the crisis. When we spend twice as much per capita on healthcare as any other nation, one might expect that we would have enough doctors all over this country. One might expect that we would have affordable prescription drugs. One might expect that we were preparing effectively for a pandemic, that we were ready with the ventilators, with the ICUs, with the test kits that we need.

Bernie Sanders: (12:02)
We are not, and bottom line here is in terms of Medicare for all, despite what the vice president is saying, what the experts tell us, is that one of the reasons that we are unprepared and have been unprepared is we don’t have a system. We got thousands of private insurance plans. That is not a system that is prepared to provide healthcare to all people. In a good year without the epidemic, we’re losing up to 60,000 people who die every year because they don’t get to a doctor on time. It’s clearly this crisis is only making a bad situation worse.

Joe Biden: (12:39)
That has nothing to do when you’re in a national crisis. The national crisis says we’re responding. It’s all free. You don’t have to pay for a thing. That has nothing to do with whether or not you have an insurance policy. This is a crisis. We’re at war with the virus. We’re at war with the virus. It has nothing to do with copays or anything. We just pass a law saying that you do not have to pay for any of this, period.

Bernie Sanders: (13:08)
That’s not true. As a matter of fact, that’s not true. That law has enormous loopholes. I understand that Nancy Pelosi did her best. Republicans prevented it. What you’re-

Joe Biden: (13:15)
No, I’m-

Bernie Sanders: (13:16)
What you’re talking about, Joe, here, is enormous loopholes within that, that in fact it is not necessarily covering treatment for all people in America, and that people are going to be stuck with a bill unless we change that, and we’re going to offer legislation to in fact change that.

Joe Biden: (13:30)
If I may, I offered legislation. I laid out on my plan that it would cover exactly what is not covered by the house. I laid out in the plan that I laid out for how we would deal with this crisis. Nobody, nobody will pay for anything having to do with the crisis. This is a national emergency. There isn’t a question of whether or not this is something that could be covered by insurance, or anything else. We, out of the treasury, are going to pay for this. It’s a national emergency.

Bernie Sanders: (14:00)
But you see …

Joe Biden: (14:00)
That’s what my plan calls for.

Bernie Sanders: (14:01)
But the weakness of this is, let’s just do a hypothetical. A family member’s diagnosed with the virus.

Joe Biden: (14:09)
Yep.

Bernie Sanders: (14:09)
Terrible tragedy, massive anxiety. The wife has the virus. The husband is a wreck, wants to go to a psychologist, wants to get counseling, doesn’t have the money to do that. Maybe their kid breaks a leg. They don’t have the money to go to healthcare. So you’re saying right now in the middle of a crisis, but you know what? Last year at least 30,000 people died in America because they didn’t get healthcare when they should, because we don’t have universal coverage. I think that’s a crisis. One out of five people in America cannot afford the prescription drugs they need. They suffer. Some die. I consider that a crisis. Bottom line is we need a simple system, which exists in Canada, exists in countries all over the world, and that is if you are an American, you get the healthcare you need, end of discussion. We can save huge sums of money doing that. The trick is, do we have the guts to take on the healthcare industry, some of which is funding the vice president’s campaign. Do we have the courage to take on the executives at the prescription drug industry …